I'm from Germany so we always are a
little bit cautious on data collection
because 80 years ago there was big
problems in this country. So they didn't
have computers luckily but if they had
Facebook or Google or something which
collects all the data it would have been
so easy for them to actually find out
the people they don't like and put them
somewhere where they don't want to be.
[Music]
Hey everyone, welcome to the Smart
Economy podcast where we ask your
favorite builders the questions you wish
you could ask yourself. This is a
production of neonnewstoay.com and I'm
your host Dylan Grabowski.
In this episode, we were joined by Ingo
Ruba, the founder of Kilt Protocol, a
decentralized identity solution for
enterprise, governments, and
consumers. In this conversation, we
discussed how identity is broken in web
2 and how decentralization fixes it. How
to get people caring about identity
solutions, why Kilt is built natively to
Polka Dot, but also builds on Ethereum.
Kilts products as use cases and
examples, where ENS got it wrong, and so
much more. Just a reminder, nothing said
on this podcast is a solicitation to buy
or sell any tokens, and that the guest
or host might hold tokens discussed in
any given episode. You can check out a
full disclaimer at www.newstoday.com.
If you enjoyed this episode, please
consider rating and reviewing it on your
favorite podcasting platform and sharing
it with your friends and family. Every
rate, review, like, and comment helps us
reach more people and bring you more of
your favorite guests. With all that
said, I really enjoyed speaking with
Ingo and I hope you enjoy the
conversation, too. Hey everyone, welcome
to the Smart Economy podcast. Today
we're joined by Eningo Ruba, the founder
of Kilt Protocol, a decentralized
digital identity solution for
enterprise, governments, and consumers.
Excited to have you. How you doing
today, Eno? I'm doing absolutely fine,
thank you very much. How are you? I'm
doing great. I think identity is one of
those things that is probably one of the
least sexy topics in crypto, but it is
massively important in our day-to-day
lives. So, maybe we can just start with
like a quick brief overview. Um, Kilt
was in conceptualized founded around
2018. what made you want to start
working on identity uh back during the
the post ICO bare market? Yeah, that's
actually okay. U that's a little bit of
history. So uh my background is I'm a
computer scientist and I worked in
industry for many many years and uh the
last position I had in industry was a
CTO of a big publishing company like
15,000 employees like really big
international one and I came around
blockchain in 2015 on the south by
Southwest by the way which is starting
this week and there was the Ethereum
team speaking there and I got infected
immediately. So I thought okay this is
going to change everything. So I went
back to the group bot and said we I
found a new technology. This is going to
change everything. This is really
important for us. We have to do
something because we say we are a tech
and media company. So we have to do
something. And uh then I discussed with
them like two or 3 years uh like it is
in big companies and uh at one point
they said yeah maybe we should do
something even though we don't really
understand it and it's not really very
close to our core business but what
about uh you find us a new CTO and we
give you the money to fund the company
so that you don't have to talk with VCs
and you do whatever blockchainy thing
you do necessary. So, and then I said,
"Okay, this is probably a once in
a-lifetime chance." So, you don't say no
to that, right? So, so they gave me a
pot of money. They gave me uh the people
I picked from uh the departments there
in it uh so I could actually run my
company. And then we were sitting there
on the 1st of January in 2018 and say
now we have the people, we have the
money, what are we going to do with it?
And then we say actually we are industry
funded. Uh so we should look for
something which is very close to the
really really like boring old uh
industry um and find the segue where
blockchain might be useful for them and
uh said yeah so in the web two identity
is totally broken I think we all know
that in blockchain identity is also not
really decided how it's going to be and
you could use blockchain for a lot of
things because uh identity
is a thing where trust is in is where
truth is in. So it sounds a little bit
like you should connect the web two and
the web 3 with blockchain and then we
say okay we go to identity. This was how
we came into identity in 2018.
So 2015 uh to kind of have like an aha
moment with Ethereum right away is
pretty incredible. Was that the first
time you came across blockchain or
crypto in 2015 or did you have kind of a
an introduction in years prior and then
after seeing that presentation at South
by Southwest it kind of clicked for you?
There there was a very very sad
interaction I had in 2012 when I first
encountered Bitcoin and maybe 2011 I'm
not sure. So, the Bitcoin was like $2 at
that time. And I said to my wife, "Hey,
this thing there that seems to be
important. Shall we maybe just buy
10,000 of these things?" And she said,
"No, we're not going into this nerd
[__] H we we need a sofa." Now, we
still have a sofa. Um but uh 10,000
bitcoins would have been much better in
in retrospect.
Definitely more than 10,000 sofas. Um my
experience is similar. I I looked at it,
I saw the price drop and then I figured
ah for another time. I was a broke
graduate student at the time and four
years later I finally got into the
space. Um so you mentioned that you you
had kind of a diversified background.
You were working at a media and tech
company when you were at that South by
Southwest event. Um your whole career is
is a bit diversified though. Um, you've
spanned healthcare, media, energy, and
then ultimately culminating in Kilt in
2018. So, maybe could you just like walk
us through your career trajectory and
maybe some of the pinpoints you
experienced at the different industry
that you worked in as it pertained to
identity issues that maybe your
enterprise or institutional clients
might have had, maybe some of the
governments you were dealing with, or
maybe even some of the consumers that
you represented. Yeah. Maybe first of
all why did I work in so many fields? Um
I do this I did this on purpose uh
because uh the the cool thing about and
so to all the kids out there study
computer science because when you study
computer science you are able to work in
all the verticals actually because
everyone needs a computer scientist
without actually going too deep into the
field so that it becomes boring or messy
or whatnot. If you work in hospitals as
a as a computer scientist, you don't
have to touch the sick people, right?
That's quite nice actually. But you
still learn everything about the
processes and you can make them better
and you learn a lot about medicine. So
you actually get all the knowledge for
free and uh you can play around there
make it even a little bit better and
then say hey um actually how's
publishing working and then go into
publishing. So that that was my plan of
life to see as much as possible and this
is why I made this diversified career
with staying between three and six years
basically in one industry and then
moving on to the next industry. That was
uh that was the plan. Um of course I was
confronted very much in in the
healthcare industry. uh I'm you're
you're always confronted with anything
about identity and security and personal
data and all that that that is really
really important and it is also totally
an issue still. So we we do not really
have the data protected as it should be.
The medical data as you probably know is
not sitting with you. It is sitting
either with your health care provider or
it is sitting with your doctors. uh
sometimes the doctors don't know what
the healthcare provider knows and vice
versa if you run into a complicated
situation uh and you need immediate help
then all your data is definitely not
accessible uh which is also not good so
there there's tons of unsolved problems
in there so uh I think that is where
what actually became uh most obvious to
me another thing with identity in the
publishing industry that was probably
not um only in the publishing industry
that was at the time in uh 2016 2017
when GDPR came up uh which also has to
do something with identity and personal
data um we noticed that um so GDPR just
as an explanation very simply says um
it's it's a a European regulation uh but
it's adopted here and there in the world
as well. It basically says if you have a
company and this company owns or has
personal data of person X then person X
can call at any time and say show me the
data and if they don't like the data
they can even say delete the data and
then you have to do that and if you
don't do that you are fined up to 4% of
your annual turnover not of the profit
of the turnover that the company makes
and for a big company this can very
easily go into billions. So there
there's a very very strong protection
but I was working as a CTO at that time.
So I had the other side of the problem
saying oh wow which data do we have? And
this is where I noticed that in big
companies nobody actually knows which
data we have. So we uh actually
encountered 126 databases holding uh
different types of personal data and uh
so now if somebody calls and says delete
my data. How can we even have a
possibility to find out if uh how can we
look into 126 databases and see if this
person is in there? So that was that was
a project like two years we had to
invest a lot but this shows on the other
side how lazy or not yeah not really
thinking we are with personal data with
identity and that also brings you to
start it starts your thinking. Yeah. So,
um, definitely want to dig into a little
bit more data concerns here in a minute,
but I just want to double click on
something that you brought up before we
hit record. You said, uh, you're based
in the EU right now, and you said that
every year it's kind of a decision you
have to make between visiting South by
Southwest or visiting ETH Denver. ETH
Denver just happened, so we don't have a
fun little uh, back and forth that we
can share on on our experiences at the
event, but I am curious, why South by
Southwest? A lot of folks might
recognize that event as kind of a
musicoriented event. Though in the past
decade or so, it's
definitely expanded to offer tech
ccentric conversations, techcentric sort
of debates, panels, workshops. Why is it
a keynote event for you every year to to
debate between going to this or to uh
one of the largest innovation festivals
and hackathons? Yeah. For for me,
Southby is is really standing out
because Southby very much looks into the
future. So, as I said, blockchain was a
topic at Southby in 2015. It's not now
anymore because this is something which
already exists. So, why would we talk
about this is the the spirit of Southby.
We talk about what's going to happen in
the next 5 years, not what happened in
last 5 years or in last 10 years even.
So they they basically said blockchain
was interesting or a major topic for
them in 2015 2016 and then it was dead
for them and that is really important
for for me because I want to know what
the future is because I have to think
about this future. I have to understand
it. Sometimes it's also crap that you
learn of course, but sometimes it is
really important. And what is also
really important at the
southb it's it's really nicely vetted.
So you have a lot of really intelligent
people on the stage, but you also have
all the really important people in the
crowd. So it's not um it's it's it's
very much like everyone who's a decision
maker somewhere around the world like
all the CTO's all the the people from
the legal departments which have to make
the the real big decisions they are all
there in the crowd and every speech that
you hear has the possibility to walk up
to the mic and ask questions. So, I'm
interested in getting to know the people
who are at the mic actually and asking
questions because I can then either
behind the guy on the stage and and talk
with them or I can go up to the people
who just said something and this is how
I make really really important
interesting contact. So, it's I don't
need a booth there. I just go there
myself and I go to the topics which
where I don't even understand the
headline because that makes sure I'm
going to learn something absolutely new.
And this is for 7 days or something. So
you learn a lot, right? So this this is
a huge event. I think it has like
300,000 people coming and and that's
fantastic. So and and I think for for
the blockchain people, we have to look a
little bit beyond crypto. Um crypto is
fine and funny and and everything. We do
have a technology which is mostly used
in our own ecosystem in a way, right? So
making a memecoin is basically hey using
crypto for making crypto. Uh that that
is that's okay that's a viable business
model. Let's do that. Uh but uh we we
always come from the from the side okay
what can we actually use it for or where
are actually we come from a different
side where are problems that we can help
solving with blockchain and that is so
much more interesting actually. So I
find it really important to go to those
you can call them web two or um old
people's conferences that I know I mean
you you really find the decision makers
there and you find the time to talk with
people not not only about hey can I have
some merch so it's very much beyond
merch it's it's really having
discussions and going for a coffee after
that and having an hour of meaningful
talk and that very seldomly
unfortunately happens on crypto
conferences not saying they have crypto
conferences, you shouldn't go. Of
course, you should go there, too. But
you should be as open enough, I would
say, uh to also go to the Yeah. to to to
events which are not crypto centered.
Yeah. I had that moment at ETH Denver
this past week. I went to a Farcaster
meetup and this was the second time I've
been to a Farcaster meetup where these
were some of the best conversations I've
had in some of the blockchain crypto
meetups I've been to in the past few
years. largely because we were talking
about everything but blockchain and
crypto. We got to talk about the world
philosophy, medicine, health, um
interpersonal relationships, and these
are the conversations that stand out so
much from the Farcaster meetups that
when you go to a Bitcoin or a crypto
meetup or or a blockchain meetup, it's
always so singular. It's always so
focused on a very specific topic. So,
it's really interesting to hear like
this is why you choose to go to South by
Southwest. Um, I kind of want to pull on
that thread a little bit because as you
mentioned, um, with GDPR, the right to
be forgotten, you you went through these
kind of like growing pains of figuring
out what data you had and who it was
attributed to. So, I'm curious, you
know, from somebody who spends so much
time of their day-to-day working in the
identity
space, what are some other kind of
concerns or areas of focus that you
have? And and they they may be
cryptoreated, they may not be, but we we
have so many different kind of touch
points when it comes to identification
in both the physical and in the virtual
world. So maybe you can just kind of
take a moment to share from your
perspective where identity touches all
of us and how it impacts our day-to-day
lives and then maybe we can kind of use
that experience to hone in a little bit
more onto kilt. Yeah. So identity I
think touches us very very often because
identity but you just said
identification. Identity and
identification are two totally different
things and that's that's the that's the
first thing. So identification is just I
prove I am I. Yeah. So you can do that
with many things. Uh so you need an
identifier for that and an identifier in
the real world are things like for
example your fingerprint or your
signature and then you have identified
yourself. So that but that's not really
data. That's that's an interaction that
you have which is also nice and and used
a lot. But identity is a little bit goes
a little bit beyond that. Identity is
not only what I say about me like I'ming
and I can prove that am I with my with
my thumb. It also is also what other
people say about me. And here it becomes
interesting because if other people like
the DMV says I'm entitled to drive a car
then I can drive a car. This is not me
saying I can drive a car or not me
saying I'm Ingo. This is somewhere else
saying I can drive a car. This is
identity because then I'm who can drive
a car. And if I'm Ing who who can drive
a car and has a fishing license and go
can go to this lake and pull out all the
fish that he likes and also have a
university degree uh which I can use to
apply for an interesting job for
example. And then I have this uh key
card which opens my hotel room. Sorry
for being in a hotel which is also part
of my identity because I'm the guy who
can open the door hopefully the only
one.
tonight who's sleeping there together
with my driver's license and my fishing
license and my uh university degree and
stuff like that that makes a person
right and when it is possible to
accumulate this data then you can make a
profile for persons and this is what you
don't want for other people to do
because they get power over you.
Normally the identity should be
something that you own and that you only
partially disclose to different people
and this is what we actually have in the
real world which is
fantastic because we have all those
documents right I have my driver's
license I have my university degree and
I'm not if somebody's if the if the
policeman stops me with a car I'm not
going to show him my uh my my high
school diploma or something like that
right I'm going to show him just this
one thing and he doesn't need to know
anything more about me. And if I want to
use the same credential, which is the
driver's license, to get into a bar in
the US, I can even go so far uh to put
my finger over the name because the
bouncer does not need to know what my
name is. He only needs to know what my
date of birth is and he has to see that
the picture on the credential matches
the guy standing in front of him, which
is the identification part. So that is
the identification, but identity is much
more. And uh so and so we have actually
a pretty good concept in the physical
world for the last 500 years which we
never think about because it's just so
efficient and then we went to the
internet and it all went broke and
because there we have the big Facebooks
and so on uh which collect Twitter which
collect a lot of our data and this is
all then not in my pocket it's all in
their pocket and here it becomes uh
dangerous because they can relate the
different data to each other, make
profiles, sell those profiles, make
profit on that, uh potentially give them
to the wrong people, right? Then that is
also really really important. So um I'm
I'm from Germany so we always are a
little bit cautious on data collection
because we had like uh 80 years ago
there was big problems in this country.
So they didn't have computers luckily.
But if they had Facebook or Google or
something which collects all the data,
it would have been so easy for them to
actually find out the people they don't
like and uh put them somewhere where
they don't want to be and so it becomes
really really dangerous also on that
level and um this is why we look into
things. So we we do have a lot of laws
like GDPR and stuff like that. So that
you that's not so easy to collect data
but still it would be much better if you
just own your own data. That's the
simplest thing. It is just
decentralization. And this is why I like
blockchain because it decentralizes the
data. And as long as I own the data and
I and I willingly disclose parts of that
to people, then I feel much safer than
giving just everything to one entity and
say they are going to take care of my
data. They're going to be good to me.
Maybe not. So I'm going to give a little
preamble, but ultimately I'm going to
end up asking uh what do we do to get
people to care about data and and their
identity and and ID um and
identification. Uh when I was in college
20 years ago, we were even talking about
the average American family. The amount
of data that they share as an average
unit of four could surmount to
approximately $20,000 a year in
additional income if they owned that
data and then they themselves sold it to
the companies that buy it and use that
data to advertise on behalf of that
familial unit of four. And that was just
20 years ago. In the 20 years since, I
still don't see people caring about the
fact that their data is used to sell
their information to be sold um for
their information to be sold uh for
companies to use to target them for
advertising and things of this nature.
And if we even go more granular and we
go into the physical realm, so that was
the virtual, but now in the physical
realm, when people go to a bar and they
want to verify that they're 21 in the
States or maybe 18 in other parts of the
world, they show their ID and they're
not upset that the bar, the bouncer is
or the bartender is seeing their
address, is seeing their date of birth,
is seeing their name. This is just not
something that the average person cares
about, even when you put something as as
large as a price tag of $20,000 per year
in your data that's being sold to
companies. So, roundabout, um, how do
you think we get people to care about
these issues? Because the average person
doesn't, um, until they have to, until
they do. So, what's kind of like the
uphill battle that you think we're
facing to get people to be concerned
about their physical and virtual
identity um concerns? Yeah. So, you
first thing you don't have you shouldn't
make it too complicated for people to
actually jump over and another thing is
that you have to you shouldn't start at
the individual. So, making sign posts
out there like take care of your data is
not going to have any effect. uh
especially also the the $20,000 I think
are completely exaggerated. So we
calculated that two uh for I think a
Facebook user is worth like
$72 per year or something. So it's it's
it's not really 2,000 but it's maybe 200
uh rather. So it's so you're not you
can't live off that. So as long as you
can't live off that then it's not
interesting for people especially if
they have more burdens with that. I
think that you always have to start with
industry players who actually offer
these possibilities and make them
attractive uh to people and then uh it
is a very very slow education thing.
Things sometimes have to go wrong. I
think that we have a lot lot of data
theft already that does not seem to be
enough. But let's just take one country
starting to follow people and then this
country is going to be very much aware
of of of these things later. So it's so
I think we we need to see catastrophes
first and we don't have to catch
everyone as well. So it's not
necessarily if you ask people if they
feel safe with their data at Facebook
then 90% of the people say no I don't.
uh if you ask the same round of people
if they are willing to do anything
against it then 90% say no we don't so
basically there there's a discrepancy so
they don't really see uh the potential
damage that's going to happen but so
where where can we start we can talk we
can start with the 10% with the 10% who
are actually willing to do something
against that and at one point uh they
will see that they have an advantage
over the others and the the other ones
will see Why do those people have an
advantage over me? They so they they
cannot be deported or whatever is going
to happen. And I think we live in very
very interesting times especially for
these things currently especially in the
US. So uh I think a lot of really nasty
things are going to happen or are
already happening and the idea about why
was my uh identity actually stored in
central places uh is going to be more
interesting. Um it it it just takes
time. uh it is a logical thing because
uh from a from a computer scientist
standpoint we had a very good solution
in the physical realm and then we moved
into the digital realm where we should
actually progress and we did not we made
a step back in the freedom of the people
and this is where you have to work on uh
I think so I'm happy to work on that
because I think it is necessary and I'm
but I'm not a missionary I'm I'm not
going to tell everyone you have to use
that now because otherwise yeah whatever
I mean um I'm really mad at you so this
is not going to happen so but the first
thing the first step that you have to do
to make it possible right so if it's not
so if you just talk about it and say
yeah it should be so much better u and
then there's no possibility to actually
do that and and use this then there's no
chance so what can I do as a computer
scientist I can deliver a system which
allows it. That's already cool. And then
catastrophes have to happen at one
point. Uh people have to see the
advantages or disadvantages of not using
it. All this takes a lot of time. Uh but
I'm not really going to take this uphill
battle. It is for for me I'm I'm I'm
fine when I already put the software
out. Mhm. So, I think maybe more broadly
speaking, we've identified like the
concerns and considerations that might
spark uh this awareness in in society
and and you mentioned that it's only a
small subset of society, 10% or so, that
that might actually care right now.
Maybe we're ultimately entering a world
where more people do realize their
issues with centralized solutions. Maybe
they do realize that back when we were
using paper and paper only, it it was a
lot better, maybe uh less centralized
than what we see today with data
companies that can aggregate all our
data and and and identity solutions.
Maybe you can use this moment to talk
about uh further the power that that
blockchain and the power that
decentralized solutions offer the
individual and maybe we can also expand
into larger groups be it institutions or
governments or companies. What is the
power that decentralization offers these
various different entities when it comes
to identity? I think it's it's in
general it's always the same thing. So
uh what what blockchains offer I think
the most there you can look at it from
from two or three sides. So some people
uh go into blockchain or use blockchain
uh because they want transparency. So
transparency is exactly the thing that
you don't want in identity right you
don't want to have all the data readable
for everyone but transparency can be
really important uh for governments and
so on if they want to show that they did
not waste the money and whatn not. So
the these things they they here here we
see a lot of projects coming up and they
touch identity on one or two sides but
transparency is important. Uh another
thing which comes with blockchain which
is also really really important. Uh I
think is resilience. You see that in
industry projects very often. Uh because
databases can crash. C databases can be
unavailable. Blockchains cannot.
Blockchains cannot be switched off by
anyone. Uh they cannot. So when when you
look at the defense sector for example,
we're working a lot with the defense
sector lately. Uh what they want is
resilient system. So they don't want a
database and that sits in the
headquarter and then if somebody puts a
bomb on the on on the headquarter then
the database is lost and they don't know
where everyone is. So that that's not
what they want. They want a resilient
system so that that you can throw 20
bombs on it still it works and is
accessible. So this this is really
important also in terms of identity. So
because if you want to identify someone
to uh to actually come to an event or
come to something or be able to do a
task or something uh you don't want to
see four or four servers not available,
right? You don't want that. So you need
resilient systems. That's uh one of the
things that's also important for um for
blockchain um uh which comes out of
blockchain. And the other thing is I
think really really important and what's
the core feature of
blockchain is basically that it replaces
trust with truth. Um and that that's a
uh that's the important point right when
you have a middleman uh you have that in
many applications. So for example in
identity if you have between a shop and
the uh and the consumer if you have
Twitter Facebook something in between
which actually forwards the data uh then
the shop does not have the customer
relationship uh the customer doesn't
have the real relationship to the shop
owner. Somehow it goes in the middle the
data is collected and and uh potentially
sold. What you can get with blockchain
is actually the direct connection
through the two because you don't need
the trust entity in the middle anymore
because the blockchain produces truth.
This is just the simplest thing with uh
with Bitcoin, right? Bitcoin, they can
explain that very easily. When you when
I use when I send you $100, uh I will
send that through my bank and my bank
will send it through another bank to
your bank and then you somehow there
will be a hundred on your uh on your
account. that basically says actually is
money being moved? Probably not. Uh it
just says that there's 100 and if you
trust your bank, maybe they give you the
100. Uh so that's the that's the trust
system. While when I send you 0.01
bitcoin, uh which is probably roughly
the same, it will be on the blockchain
that I sent it to you and it actually
yours, right? And there's there's no one
it is truth. This is the mathematical
truth and that is uh then that brings a
lot of nice features with it which are
which are also important in identity
solutions in the end because um you want
to know if a person actually exists if
this signature is actually this person.
So there this there's there's truth
elements in there but and I think that's
um that's where where it becomes really
interesting with with blockchain
identity cannot work without trust
because as I said in the beginning you
always have this what other people say
about me right uh so when the policeman
comes and says show me your driver's
license and then I show him a driver's
license but I have drawn that myself
uh then he probably wouldn't accept it.
He will only accept it if it is issued
by an entity that he trusts. So here we
need actually trust. So it is and this
is what what makes my work really
interesting because we are in a system
where we in in in an environment where
we cannot really rule out 100% of the
trust because you always need the
trusted entities which issue those
credentials in a digital way but we can
still uh make the proof that this thing
is valid. we can put that on a on a
trustless system on a blockchain. And
here it becomes interesting because it
is connecting the two worlds of trust
and truth. So you said earlier maybe at
the beginning of the conversation or
before we hit record that you're
currently on the road, you're doing
sales and you also just mentioned that a
lot of the folks you're chatting with
are defense entities because they like
the immutability. They like the liveless
that blockchain networks offer. They
love who do you find? Excuse me. They
love the resilience. That's the most
correct. Yeah. So I guess maybe then I'm
a little curious. Who do you find
you're having the the most generally
speaking conversations with? Is it with
entities that are looking for the
resilience that web 3 offers or is it
with web 3 individuals, web 3 users and
you're trying to show them why identity
is important? Uh we we come from a
different angle. We uh always ask people
what their problems are and sometimes
those problems can be solved with the
blockchain, sometimes they are in the
identity field. Um, and then we think
about it and see if we can solve their
problems probably with what we have. If
we don't, then we're not going to sell
them anything. But if someone comes and
has an issue and this problem could be
solved with, for example, the kill
blockchain, uh, then we're going to
sketch out a project for them and then
they might be happy and then they might
want it. This is where we how we go.
like like in the beginning like I said
we're not trying to find
uh we we're not coming from we have a
solution or let's find the problem. Uh
we try to find problems and see if the
solution that we have actually matches
and then make projects out of that. This
is why I'm at the South by Southwest
because uh the people who are my target
group don't even know what a blockchain
is. They just want a really really
resilient system for example. I say yeah
this is actually there was an invention
like 15 years ago. somebody invented
something which is so resilient, never
seen that before and then they are
interested. You don't have to tell them
it's a blockchain. Uh you tell them it's
a distributed ledger that this is much
more cryptic. Um and then they're not
afraid of it because it's not um related
to memecoins and things that people are
afraid of uh because it's then just a
technology. And then if you say we have
these things called DIDs and verifiable
credentials which is an international
standard which cames out from the W3C's
which is definitely not a blockchain
organization and we have an
implementation of that then you can
start talking to government you can
start talking to uh to industry and then
people really getting in interested in
what you have to say because you can
solve their problem which is so much
better than saying we have a blockchain
here uh do you have a problem for us? So
that's we we're trying to do that the
other way around. That takes forever. I
know. Um but I think it is the right
approach because it's it's not uh yeah
it's it's probably the way that you that
we can finally make the connection
between industry, government, and the
technology that we produce. Can I just
ask you for a moment to explain for
folks who might have never heard of W3C
or decentralized identifiers? Can you
just really quickly give like an Eli 5
of of what the entity is and what
decentralized identifiers are? Mhm. So,
um I think it was in 2016 when people
started writing books about oh the
identity thing is broken in the
internet. Um and it's a really nice
books and ooh uh the internet actually
has become very centralized and uh we
that wasn't intended because actually it
was like hey free for everyone but then
people found out actually it's if you
have a really good solution in the
internet like a really good search
engine uh then people go to your search
engine and then the name of your search
engine uh ends up in the dictionary
because now it's we we're not searching
in the industry googling right and that
is uh
that gives a lot of power to the people
who own this brand. Um so that was not
intended by the people who built the
internet and identity is broken as well.
So they said we have to do something
against that and then an organization
was founded called the DIFF the
decentralized identity foundation. Uh
that included uh the American
government, IBM, Microsoft, 300 other
companies also my company. So we all sat
together and said we have to solve this
thing together. Why together? Because if
we solve it just us then nobody's going
to use it because that's that does not
give any investment security. What you
need you need to standardize how
identity looks in the digital world like
a sheet of paper. The sheet of paper is
always the same size. This is why you
can build a printer. Otherwise you
couldn't build a printer if they were
like random, right? It wouldn't work. So
you need a standardization of the size
of this thing. And so you need a
standardization of how does in the
digital world actually an identity look.
So we all came together and said we are
going to define that and we have that as
an international standard. Um that was
in so I joined that started in 2017 I
joined it in 2018. Um and then we sat
there until I think 2020 and then we had
the feeling that basically it's quite
good uh what we have. So that was more
than 1,000 scientists sitting together
all over the world and absolutely crazy
work. And then we said okay now the
industry has built the standard but now
we need a stamp on it. And then we went
to the W3F that is the worldwide web
consortium. This is the people who also
standardized things like HTTP. So
everyone uses HTTP every day that's
their standard. So if you want to go
somewhere for digital and have a stamp
you go there. Um it's really interesting
to go there because they are dominated
by Facebook and Google. um and Facebook
was really not into it. So they didn't
want the standardization for
decentralized identity. Um but uh in the
end Google helped a lot and uh then it
came uh to work. So since 2021 I think
we have officially the standardization
and what that does is uh it gives people
the security it gives also governments
the security that if they build software
or buy software and which adheres to the
standard then they did a good investment
because this is going to prevail because
we need digital identity in some way. If
anyone is going to go into this field
they're going to use the standard. What
else? It's it's not like that it's like
if you want to build a printer yeah
probably you use the paper size which is
already there right this is why we
needed the standard and that was really
a lot of work but now it is there and
now we see DIDs and verifiable
credentials getting picked up by
different countries for example the US
uh the department of homeland security
is going to issue um passports uh or
passports yeah or identity cards uh for
American citizens in the ID and
verifiable credential format So uh
that's going to have a huge impact on
middle America, Central America, South
America because that um the US acts as a
um as an example there. Uh we see that
also in Southeast Asia coming up. We see
companies like for example Dloid which
we work to gather a lot um coming up
with using DIDs and verifiable
credentials. So this is also a slow
process but it is happening because it
is the standard how you make identity in
the internet. Very cool. Um, thank you
for going into that and sharing a brief
background about um, standardization,
which is supremely important, especially
when coming up with new protocols for
the rest of the world to adopt. Um, I'm
curious to hear a little bit about
Kilt's perspective on blockchain
networks. How does Kilt evaluate which
blockchain networks to support? What are
the blockchain networks that Kilt
supports? And what are the kind of
differences between um blockchains that
you guys did opt to integrate and
operate on top of uh maybe versus some
others that you don't need to name and
and why you chose not to go with other
blockchain networks? We only said
positive things. So we we are native
Polka Dot. So uh we we came from the
polka dot ecosystem. um why we actually
started. So we we wrote it all up what
we want to do and then we had a vision
of what we want to implement and then we
first went to potential customers. Uh so
that was um the the the entities of
countries which for example print the
passports. Uh we talked with them and
they said oh this is really modern they
were really interesting. How much does
it cost? Uh and say yeah we're probably
going to do it on Ethereum. Um and then
unfortunately we cannot really tell you
what it costs because there's gas and
the gas sometimes cost this and then
then they said this is not a product
that we can use because we need to
calculate the production cost and if you
can't calculate the production cost
there's the door. Um so we said we have
to control the production cost. So we
have in the end somehow to uh build our
own blockchain. In 2018 there were not
too many frameworks for building
blockchains. Uh basically substrate was
coming up. That's the thing that polka
dot is built on. So we said, "Okay guys,
we're going to work with you." They
lived in the same city. Perfect. We can
even go out and have a drink together
and ask questions. Uh it was a very very
small ecosystem at the time. Uh so you
probably know Gavin Wood. I think you
interviewed Fabby. Fabby was already
there. But if you had like a because it
was not documented, if you had a
question that you could go into element
and just ask the question and Gavin was
going to answer in 5 minutes. It was
fantastic, small and nice. Uh so we felt
really well on the long run. So Kil is
still approaching to Polka Dot. So we we
are always going to be friends with
Polka Dot but uh they there's certain
entities out there uh which already have
software um like banks for example who
want to work uh with the stuff and they
want us to integrate in their existing
software. This software very often runs
on Ethereum because they started early
as well uh and Ethereum was the thing
where you built your software. So we
have to uh also cater for them. So what
we're currently supporting uh is polka
dot of course kilt is native polka dov
but we also support ethereum now we also
support bass and that's basically what
we support currently yeah it's really
nice to see the uh the shout out to a
former smart economy podcast guest
Fabian G was a very fun conversation
really cool to kind of hear the the the
ties that killed has with that ecosystem
also polka dot was probably the best
party that I went to last year at
consensus in in Austin So, shout out to
the Polka Dot team. Um, so I want to
talk a little bit about the the four
primary products that that Kilt offers.
Um, I'm sure that there's a lot of
overlap between them. Um, there's a
wallet, there's Social KYC, there's W3N,
and there's DID sign. So, maybe let's
just start with Social KYC. um how what
what is social KYC and how does it kind
of operate as the passport that you guys
intend for it to be for the open web? So
maybe for those products one one
sentence before that um these are
products yes but they are not made like
um we want to get rich on those
products. So we are we are building the
underlying technology but it's really
hard to see a blockchain working. So if
you want to demonstrate it, you
basically need something how you
demonstrate it and this is why we built
those product. So there's no commercial
background behind these products. It's
so and this is sometimes uh so sometimes
we even actually don't want to people to
use the block the products. If you see
the wallet, you probably have seen the
wallet. It's called Sporon. Beautiful
name, but the ugliest wallet that you
have ever seen. That was on purpose
because we don't want people to rely on
that wallet. We just want to show how an
identity wallet would look like because
your the wallet that you have in uh your
your pocket uh that holds maybe a little
bit of coins, but it also holds your
credentials, right? Your driver's
license and stuff like that. And this is
what Sporon is, but it's not it's not we
we're not going to sell it. We want
people to build their own wallets. Yeah.
And so we made it open source so that
you can take it apart and build your own
wallet. And this is what other people
are doing. when you look at the deoid
website they also have a wallet for
holding your credentials for example
that is based on sporum but it looks
much better than what we have built so
but but the question was about social
KYC so social KYC um is um intended for
internet people I would say uh because
in the internet you don't want to be so
KYC everyone knows what a KYC is that is
like know your customer you basically go
to you you take your you've done that
before you take passport or your um your
ID card. You wiggle that a little bit in
front of a camera and then somebody
says, "Yeah, this is obviously you." And
then they issue some kind of a
credential to you and then your KY was
seated and then you can play with this
one bank. Um that is always on
stateisssued credentials like the
passport. So uh in the internet there
might be cases where this is absolutely
worthless and where you want to stay
anonymous from that as well at the same
time. So let's make example like gaming.
So if I play massive multiplayer online
games with a guy in China for example
and um he cheats me in whatever form he
steals something from me so he seems to
be dangerous. Um so shall I call the
Chinese police and say hey this guy KYC
to me please go to them to to the home
and bring my sword back or my potion.
That's not going to work. uh but if I
know who who this guy is in the
internet, I have much more power over
him. So let's give people the
possibility to identify not with the
state credential but with things that
are important in the internet like this
is this person with this email address,
this is this person with this Twitter
account, this is this person with this
GitHub account and so on. Because if I
have all that and this guy from China
cheats me, I can go on Twitter and say
this guy is dangerous. don't play with
him. That's going to damage him a lot,
right? So, he's hopefully not doing it
again then anymore. So, I have a greater
power without the KYC than I would have
with the KYC. And still this guy can
stay anonymous and I can stay anonymous
at the same time. So, this is what
Social KYC is about. It issues
credentials to you checking if you
actually own uh an account. So, for
example, you go into Social KC, you say
I'm this and this on Twitter. Um then
social care C tells you, okay, please
prove by tweeting this line. Then you
tweet this line. Social KC looks into
Twitter. If you actually tweeted this
line, then you obviously have control
over the Twitter account. Then you get a
credential which you can store in your
own identity wallet saying you own
exactly this Twitter account. And then
you go again and make this with your
Facebook account and make this with your
email address and so on. And then
someone who wants to play with you can
say I need three social KYC credentials
from you to actually trust you who you
are. This is what social care is about.
So I appreciate that um Kilt created the
products not for productization and to
drive revenue but rather to show what
can be done with these these tools and
these solutions because blockchain can
be such an abstract concept. So it's
really cool to hear how Deote built
their credent their wallet and
integrated credentials uh using Sporen
as kind of an initial use case. So maybe
we don't have to double down on on all
the products that are listed on the the
Kilt website, but maybe we can just like
hone in a little bit on W3N. Um I think
what was super interesting is that the
the the naming service aims to improve
the usability of wallet addresses across
different networks. So maybe what are
the opportunities and constraints that
you might face as an identity solution
when there's different naming service
protocols on different blockchains? Um
what makes it difficult and what makes
unique opportunities when you have to
start connecting ENS's on different
networks and and different decentralized
identifiers? Yeah. So I'm I was never
happy with ENS because I'm a computer
scientist and ENS is so wrong in many
ways. Um it starts with how it looks. Uh
so it's yeah you don't do it like that.
Uh we we thought maybe we can do a
little bit better than ENS. Uh because
we have this concept of the DID. The DID
is more than a crypto address and ENS is
always linked to a crypto address. But a
crypto address is something that lives
on the Ethereum network. Um and this is
like it would be a little bit like
connecting your name to your bank
account actually. So first is the bank
account uh and then you connect your
name to it and then you do everything
with your bank account basically like uh
interacting with people sending messages
with people. Yeah, you can identify me
with your bank with my bank account.
This feels wrong, right? So it start
should start one abstraction level on
top of that. And this is what DIDs are.
A ID is a unique identifier where I own
the uh private keys to so I can make the
signatures so I can identify with the
signatures but everything around it is
unique and it's owned by me and of
course I can add to such a cryp to such
a DID I can add many crypto addresses
like this is my uh Ethereum address
number one this is my Ethereum address
number two this is my pocket address
this is my base address stuff like that
so and and then this is connected to
And then I can add to that also my name.
And when I can add a human readable
name, this is a one to one connection to
the DID. And the connection between the
DID and the crypto addresses is one to
N. So I'm extract I'm abstracting away
from I am identified with my crypto
address. I'm a person who lives only on
Ethereum or only on Polka Dot. I'm a
person who lives in the broader internet
I would say and that's so what what's
cool about the W3N is actually that's
not connecting to a crypto address is
connected to a DID that's the difference
building in blockchain one year feels
like seven years so to be building since
2018 is like half a lifetime so what are
some of the differences that you've seen
in this industry when you first started
building in 2018
And what are some things that have kind
of just like I don't want to say caught
you by surprise, but where where are we
today versus where you thought we would
be in 2018? How have things progressed?
How have you guys had to adapt when it
comes to identity on online and on
chain? Just really curious to hear any
insights. Yeah. So when we started in
2018, so Berlin in blockchain in 2018
was fantastic uh because that was the
center of the world, right? It was like
it was where Ethereum was built. It was
where Polka Dot was built. It was where
Cosmos was built. All the builders were
there. The crazy people who sit on dirty
sofas with their laptops and just do
crazy stuff. So that that was that was
the fantastic life, the scientific life
also which I wanted to have and where I
said I have to. So a sea-level thing in
the industry gives you a lot of money
and fame. I said I'm going to trade that
all for sitting on that sofa. uh because
I want to be with those guys. And that
was very much the 2018 feeling. This
went away very much when some of the
guys on the sofa went became very rich
and uh moved away uh for not paying
taxes and not programming anymore but
doing drugs or whatnot. Don't know. Uh I
don't know what those guys doing now.
Um and uh then a new generation of uh
people came in which said okay there
were some people who had just uh who
just got rich uh can I also get rich and
then this went into a spiral of a lot of
people just wanted to get rich and not
really doing the cool stuff anymore and
this is another shout out to polka dot
this is how polka dot still is what
we're building in polka dot or what
Gavin is building in polka dot with jam
M is again the next generation of
blockchain now. So these are the things
which where where I where I came for and
this is so beautiful because there's so
much brain going into that and it's so
nice to see that uh we have this gem
tour now which goes from university to
university to university starting in
Cambridge currently there in China. uh
they're basically picking up the best
people from all the universities for uh
sitting on dirty sofas and starting all
over again. This is so fantastic and
this is so much fun and I would have
imagined in 2018 that it always stays
like that and it didn't. So that is what
frustrates me a little bit. It was too
much about the money at one point. I
know money is important. I also like
money. I'm totally not against it. it it
became too much focused on the money and
not on the science. And the science that
we do in blockchain is beautiful and
there's so many people out there who
don't really care about that and that's
sad.
So I think
maybe something that kind of blew my
mind at consensus last year was starting
to go to all these AI talks and uh I
believe it was from theoric where
somebody mentioned that we've we've
focused especially since sitting on the
dirty the dirty sofas in 2018 we really
focused on onboarding the first billion
users and last year at this talk my mind
was kind of warped when one of the AI
companies said that the first billion
users might not even be human anymore.
The wallets might be owned by AI agents.
So, how has AI tweaked what you're
focusing on at Kilt? Maybe thrown a
wrench into your plans or how do you
have to maybe if we word it differently,
how are you kind of like adapting and
preparing for a world where there is
also AI entities, some we might trust,
some we might not trust. And how does
this kind of increase the complexity of
ensuring that someone we're listening
to, some content we consume is indeed a
human or even a a good AI agent and not
a male a malicious AI agent. I would
actually love to have another hour for
that because that is really something
that I'm thinking about for the last two
years and uh we're also published a
little bit on on Twitter and LinkedIn
about that. Uh so um in very short
um if you give power to an AI agent
which you do if you share your private
keys with it right so if if you want the
agent to do something for you buy a
cryptocurrency or sell a cryptocurrency
you b they're basically using your money
to do things um then this agent should
have some agency right they they should
be responsible for what they do they
should be it should be possible to uh
they should be liable for what they do
in the end. Um and this meets a need
this means you need to identify them
first. Um and they need to have
credentials by others saying for example
this is a good agent. We checked it. It
went through an audit and something like
that. So you will trust this maybe a
little bit more to handle your money.
But if something goes wrong you want to
sue the agent. And this is what we're
thinking about a lot currently how you
can do that and there are really nice
possibilities but this is really I know
that we are on top of the hour but so
this is actually an totally new talk and
this is where verifiable credentials and
actually come come in very handy. So for
us it is just a new line of business uh
the AI agents. So very interesting stuff
where we can actually do good things
because nobody seems to think about
these things. They they just think about
how they can transport the AI agent from
one blockchain to another. It's also
really interesting. But uh you need uh
either truth or trust in the system and
that is currently not existing. I
implore anyone who's listening to this
who's interested in the subject to go
follow Ingo on Twitter or follow the the
the team's LinkedIn uh because they are
starting to to release some really
interesting articles that are delving
into the overlap between these two
areas. So, as we kind of run up on the
hour, um what's next for Kilt? Uh what's
on the short or medium uh term road map?
Uh so yeah ask the people from the kil
foundation because I'm just from the
commercial company uh what they have in
mind. So for for me uh current so yeah I
cannot really speak
on about everything that killed wants to
do. So what I'm currently doing where I
spend like uh probably 70% of my time uh
is actually um flying around and also
using trains um to um to talk to
industry players and governments and uh
get them on board um uh in very
long-term projects. So this is nothing
which is going to materialize tomorrow
morning. Uh but we have a lot of really
interesting needs uh that we're working
on. Uh there there is more appetite. uh
the appetite is starting to grow because
people see um issues in identity but
also in the in in trust and in
resilience and so on. So uh blockchain
is basically as a solution is uh coming
up. Uh so we we feel pretty comfortable
and confident that we're doing a lot of
great things and this is what I
personally focus on. Uh there's lots of
other things which come up with kilt. uh
bonding curves is I think the hottest
thing that we have built in the last
year I would say uh it's not live yet
it's going to go it's live on a test net
it's going to go live uh in the next
couple of weeks um it's an absolutely
crazy thing which where which you can
use to build decentralized autonomous
organizations and stuff like that with
all the identity features in that
absolutely fantastic uh but uh this is
not what I'm selling currently so what
I'm selling is the basics basically and
then we do a lot for the uh community uh
so that they can also be happy about uh
getting the new crazy [__] from guild as
well. So what's the best way that
somebody can reach out to you and
contact you? For uh guilt uh we do have
a telegram group I would say that's
called kilt official. Um that that's how
you read uh how you reach the community.
Uh that's I think if you want to reach
the community, if you want to reach me,
um I would say Twitter is probably the
best. Um I'm looking into Twitter.
Awesome. Eno, thank you so much for your
time today. It was a pleasure to delve
into decentralized identity, uh the
difference between identity and
identification, um and just to chat
about the subject matter with you. It
was a it was a great hour. Thank you
very much for having me. It also was a
lot of fun for me. Awesome. Well, safe
travels to South by Southwest and uh
I'll be keeping my ears pe or my eyes
peeled to your Twitter account to see
any new and interesting conversations
you might have had there. Definitely.
Thank you so much. Bye-bye. Cheers.
Thank you so much for tuning in to the
Smarteconomy Podcast. To stay in the
loop with all our latest episodes and
insights, head over to
www.smarteconomyodcast.com. And don't
forget to subscribe to our YouTube
channel for all of our video content. If
you enjoyed today's discussion, please
consider showing your support by liking,
commenting, and reviewing this episode
on your favorite podcast platform. Your
feedback helps us reach more listeners
and bring even better content your way.
We'd also love to hear from you. So,
please drop a comment on Spotify or
YouTube to share what topics you'd like
us to cover or who you'd like to see as
our next guest. And if you or someone
you know would make a great guest,
please feel free to reach out. We're
always looking for fresh voices or new
perspectives. For our NEO token holders
out there, please consider voting for
NEO news today as your council
representative. We've proudly been
serving the NEO ecosystem since 2017 and
we'll continue to do so by putting
portions of our council rewards directly
back into ecosystem growth
initiatives. So, thanks again one more
time for taking the time to listen to
the Smart Economy podcast and we cannot
wait to catch up with you next time.